docs: Update Integration Tests Developer documentation (#6548)
keptn/keptn: docs/integration_tests.md

# Integration Tests

## Structure of Integration Tests

> The Integration Tests and their resources are located under `/test` directory in this repository. For running the Integration Tests, there are two main directories, which should we focus on:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Integration Tests and their resources are located under the `/test` directory in this repository. For running the Integration Tests, there are two main directories, which should we focus on:
```

* `/test/assets` -> directory containing resources and scripts, which are used during the run of the Integration Tests
* `/test/go-tests` -> Integration Tests and Testsuites

> Integration Tests are organized into four main Testsuites (testsuite files have `testsuite_` prefixes), where every Testsuite consists of tests which are ran on a specified machine/cluster:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Integration Tests are organized into four main testsuites (testsuite files have `testsuite_` prefixes), where every Testsuite consists of tests that are run on a specified machine/cluster:
```
I would prefer reading `test suite` (two words instead of one) but I don't have a strong opinion on this.

* GKE
* K3D
* K3S
* Minishift

> These Testsuites are ran parralelly during remote execution on Github.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These testsuites are run in parallel during pipeline execution on Github.
```

Each Testsuite consists of one or more tests, which are actually a GO functions executed in a testing context. These functions (tests) are stored in files with `test_` prefixes. Also each Test can be part of one or more Testsuites.

### Adding new Integration Test

Adding a new Integration Tests consists of two steps:
1. Writing an Integration Test (please inspire yourself with other Integrations Tests) and place it to `/test/go-tests` directory. Please note that the naming convention is important (for example test_myNewTest.go).
2. Add the test to one or more Testsuites (files with `testsuite_` prefix).

## Running Integration Tests

> There are two possibilities to run Integration Tests on Keptn project:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two possibilities to run Integration Tests:
```

* running Integration Tests remotely on Github
* running Integration Tests locally

## Run Integration Tests remotely on Github

The possibility to run Integration Tests remotely is privileged to users, who are part of the Keptn project. There are two possibilities how to run Integration Tests:

> * Running Integration Tests with default context for a specific branch (code changes ouside of `/test` directory)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Running Integration Tests with default context for a specific branch (code changes outside of the `/test` directory)
```

> * Running Integration Tests with a context from a specific branch (code changes inside of `/test` directory)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Running Integration Tests with a context from a specific branch (code changes inside of the `/test` directory)
```

> These two options can be also combined and currently only executions of all Integration Tests for all Testsuites is supported. The execution of the Tests is fairly easy:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These two options can be also combined and currently, only executions of all Integration Tests for all Testsuites are supported. The execution of the Tests is fairly easy:
```

> 1. Navigate to the `Actions` tab in `keptn/keptn` repository (https://github.com/keptn/keptn)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Navigate to the `Actions` tab in the `keptn/keptn` repository (https://github.com/keptn/keptn)
```

2. Choose `Integration Tests` from the left side menu

> 3. Click on `Run Workflow`, where a dialog window will appear. Here you need to choose the context (`Use Workflow from`) of the tests you wish to use (`master` is default). You should use this `master` context unless you have not made any changes in the Integration Tests. Secondly you choose a branch, from which the CI build artifacts (docker images) should be used from. Here you mostly use the branch of the code you are currently working on and want to run Integration Tests for your code changes. Please be aware, that you need to wait for the docker images to be buit before you can execute the Integartion Tests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Click on `Run Workflow`, where a dialog window will appear.
Here, you need to choose the context (`Use Workflow from`) of the tests you wish to use (`master` is default).
You should use this `master` context unless you have made any changes in the Integration Tests pipeline.
Secondly you choose a branch, from which the CI build artifacts (docker images) should be used.
Here, you mostly use the branch of the code you are currently working on and want to run Integration Tests for your code changes. Please be aware, that you need to wait for the docker images to be built before you can execute the Integration Tests.
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Click on `Run Workflow`, where a dialog window will appear. Here you need to choose the context (`Use Workflow from`) of the tests you wish to use (`master` is the default). You should use this `master` context unless you have not made any changes in the Integration Tests. Secondly, you choose a branch from which the CI build artifacts (docker images) will be used. Here, you mostly use the branch of the code you are currently working on and want to run Integration Tests for your code changes. Please be aware, that you need to wait for the docker images to be built before you can execute the Integration Tests.
```

## Run Integration Tests locally

### Prepare your local environment to run integration tests

> When running integration tests locally, we recommend using either K3d or Minishift. Please use the set-up steps below to set up your local enviroment before installing 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When running integration tests locally, we recommend using either [K3d](https://k3d.io/) or [Minishift](https://github.com/minishift/minishift). Please use the setup steps below to set up your local environment before installing 
```

Keptn and running the Integration Tests.

> #### **Set-up steps for K3d (recommended on Linux)**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### **Setup steps for K3d (recommended on Linux)**
```

Starting and setting up K3d is easy:

> 1. Download and install K3d (**Note**: please be aware you need to have Docker installed, more info here: https://k3d.io/v5.2.2/):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Download and install K3d (**Note**: please be aware you need to have Docker installed, more info here: https://k3d.io/):
```

    ```console

>     curl -s https://raw.githubusercontent.com/rancher/k3d/main/install.sh | bash

Reviewer 2: Not sure if it makes sense, but during the integration tests, we use k3d 4.4.8 which has different cluster creation arguments and is not fully compatible with k3d v5

Author: I recommend using k3d v5.2.2, as the arguments and all steps are prepared for this specific version and it works good on my local environment

Reviewer: I agree with @odubajDT and suggest documenting the steps for v5.2.2
Eventually, also our CI will move to a more recent version 😉

    ```
2. Create Kubernetes cluster:
    ```console
    k3d cluster create mykeptn -p "8082:80@loadbalancer" --k3s-arg "--no-deploy=traefik@server:*" --k3s-arg "--no-deploy=servicelb@server:*" --k3s-arg "--kube-proxy-arg=conntrack-max-per-core=0@server:*"  --agents 1
    ```  
3. Verify that everything has worked using `kubectl get nodes`

> #### **Set-up steps for Minishift (not recommended)**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### **Setup steps for Minishift (not recommended)**
```

# Integration Tests

## Structure of Integration Tests

> The Integration Tests and their resources are located under `/test` directory in this repository. For running the Integration Tests, there are two main directories, we will focus on:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Integration Tests and their resources are located under the `/test` directory in this repository. For running the Integration Tests, there are two main directories, we will focus on:
```

* `/test/assets` -> directory containing resources and scripts, which are used during the run of the Integration Tests
* `/test/go-tests` -> Integration Tests and testsuites

> Integration Tests are organized into four main testsuites (testsuite files have `testsuite_` prefixes), where every testsuite consists of tests which are ran on a specific Kubernetes platform:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Integration Tests are organized into four main testsuites (testsuite files have `testsuite_` prefixes), where every testsuite consists of tests which are run on a specific Kubernetes platform:
```

* GKE
* K3D
* K3S
* Minishift

> These testsuites are ran in parrallel during pipeline execution on Github.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These testsuites are run in parallel during pipeline execution on Github.
```

> Each testsuite consists of one or more tests, which are actually a Go functions executed in a testing context. These functions (tests) are stored in files with `test_` prefixes. Also, each test can be part of one or more testsuites.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each testsuite consists of one or more tests, which are actually Go functions executed in a testing context. These functions (tests) are stored in files with `test_` prefixes. Also, each test can be part of one or more testsuites.
```

2. Add the test to one or more testsuites (files with `testsuite_` prefix).

## Running Integration Tests

There are two possibilities to run Integration Tests:
* running Integration Tests remotely on Github
* running Integration Tests locally

## Run Integration Tests remotely on Github

The possibility to run Integration Tests remotely is restricted to users, who are part of the Keptn project. There are two possibilities how to run Integration Tests:
* Running Integration Tests with default context for a specific branch (code changes outside of the `/test` directory)
* Running Integration Tests with a context from a specific branch (code changes inside of the `/test` directory)

These two options can be also combined and currently, only executions of all Integration Tests for all testsuites are supported. The execution of the Tests is fairly easy:
1. Navigate to the `Actions` tab in the `keptn/keptn` repository (https://github.com/keptn/keptn)
2. Choose `Integration Tests` from the left side menu
3. Click on `Run Workflow`, where a dialog window will appear. 

>    Here, you need to choose the context (`Use Workflow from`) of the tests you wish to use (`master` is default). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Here, you need to choose the context (`Use Workflow from`) of the tests you wish to use (`master` is the default). 
```

   You should use this `master` context unless you have not made any changes in the Integration Tests pipeline. 

>    Secondly you choose a branch, from which the CI build artifacts (docker images) should be used from. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Secondly, you choose a branch, from which the CI build artifacts (docker images) should be used. 
```

>    Here, you mostly use the branch of the code you are currently working on and want to run Integration Tests for your code changes. Please be aware, that you need to wait for the docker images to be buit before you can execute the Integartion Tests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Here, you mostly use the branch of the code you are currently working on and want to run Integration Tests for your code changes. Please be aware, that you need to wait for the docker images to be built before you can execute the Integartion Tests.
```

## Run Integration Tests locally

### Prepare your local environment to run integration tests

When running integration tests locally, we recommend using either [K3d](https://k3d.io/) or [Minishift](https://github.com/minishift/minishift). Please use the setup steps below to set up your local environment before installing Keptn and running the Integration Tests.

#### **Setup steps for K3d (recommended on Linux)**

Starting and setting up K3d is easy:

1. Download and install K3d (version 5.2.2 is recommended) (**Note**: please be aware you need to have Docker installed, more info here: https://k3d.io/):
    ```console
    curl -s https://raw.githubusercontent.com/rancher/k3d/main/install.sh | TAG=v5.2.2 bash
    ```
2. Create Kubernetes cluster:
    ```console
    k3d cluster create mykeptn -p "8082:80@loadbalancer" --k3s-arg "--no-deploy=traefik@server:*" --k3s-arg "--no-deploy=servicelb@server:*" --k3s-arg "--kube-proxy-arg=conntrack-max-per-core=0@server:*"  --agents 1
    ```  
3. Verify that everything has worked using `kubectl get nodes`

#### **Setup steps for Minishift (not recommended)**

> In case you plan to use Minishift, the following steps are necessary to get Keptn running on Minishift (1.34.3):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the case you plan to use Minishift, the following steps are necessary to get Keptn running on Minishift (1.34.3):
```

       ```console
       keptn install --use-case=continuous-delivery
       ```
   * Minishift
      ```console
      keptn install --use-case=continuous-delivery --platform=openshift --verbose
      ```
   **Note**: If you want to upgrade to the latest developer version, please use `helm upgrade` with `--reuse-values` option after installation.
4. Expose Keptn
   ```console
   curl -SL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/keptn/examples/master/quickstart/expose-keptn.sh | bash
   ```
5. Open a new terminal and type:
   ```console
   kubectl -n keptn port-forward service/api-gateway-nginx 8080:80
   ```
   After executing, return back to the original terminal.
6. Authenticate Keptn:
   ```console
   keptn auth --endpoint=http://127.0.0.1:8080/api --api-token=$(kubectl get secret keptn-api-token -n keptn -ojsonpath={.data.keptn-api-token} | base64 --decode)
   ```
7. Verify the installation has worked
   ```console
   keptn status
   ```
8. Verify which images have been deployed
   ```console
   kubectl -n keptn get deployments
   ```
9.  Run tests (e.g., UniformRegistration):
   ```console
   cd test/go-tests && KEPTN_ENDPOINT="http://127.0.0.1:8080/api" go test ./...
   ```

>    **Note**: If you want to run a single test, (for example BackupTestore_Test), please add `_test` suffix to the test file name, so it becomes executable. Otherwise, you will be able to run only the `testsuite_*_test.go` files. For running a single test use:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   **Note**: If you want to run a single test, (e.g. BackupRestore_Test), please add `_test` suffix to the test file name, so it becomes executable. Otherwise, you will be able to run only the `testsuite_*_test.go` files. For running a single test use:
```

   Error from server (InternalError): Internal error occurred: unexpected response: 400
   ```
   and retry again.
5. Set policies/permissions:
   ```console
   oc adm policy --as system:admin add-cluster-role-to-user cluster-admin admin
   oc adm policy  add-cluster-role-to-user cluster-admin system:serviceaccount:default:default
   oc adm policy  add-cluster-role-to-user cluster-admin system:serviceaccount:kube-system:default
   ```
6. Note down the Minishift server URL printed by `oc status` (e.g., `https://192.168.99.101:8443`)

### Run the full installation of Integration Tests locally

Pre-requisites:

* A K8s cluster (see above)
  * 12 GB of free memory (less is possible but you will notice a significant slowdown)
  * at least 6 CPU cores on your system (less is possible but you will notice a significant slowdown)
* `kubectl`
* A local copy of this repository (keptn/keptn)
* Linux, Mac OS or Linux Subsystem for Windows
* Bash
* working internet connection

1. Setup your Kubernetes cluster (see above)
2. Install `keptn` CLI:
   ```console

>    curl -sL https://get.keptn.sh | KEPTN_VERSION=0.12.0 bash

Reviewer: Without the `KEPTN_VERSION` env var, the script downloads and installs the latest version. 
```suggestion
   curl -sL https://get.keptn.sh | bash
```

       ```console
       keptn install --use-case=continuous-delivery
       ```
   * Minishift
      ```console
      keptn install --use-case=continuous-delivery --platform=openshift --verbose
      ```
   **Note**: If you want to upgrade to the latest developer version, please use `helm upgrade` with `--reuse-values` option after installation.
4. Expose Keptn
   ```console
   curl -SL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/keptn/examples/master/quickstart/expose-keptn.sh | bash
   ```
5. Open a new terminal and type:
   ```console
   kubectl -n keptn port-forward service/api-gateway-nginx 8080:80
   ```
   After executing, return back to the original terminal.
6. Authenticate Keptn:
   ```console
   keptn auth --endpoint=http://127.0.0.1:8080/api --api-token=$(kubectl get secret keptn-api-token -n keptn -ojsonpath={.data.keptn-api-token} | base64 --decode)
   ```
7. Verify the installation has worked
   ```console
   keptn status
   ```
8. Verify which images have been deployed
   ```console
   kubectl -n keptn get deployments
   ```
9.  Run tests (e.g., UniformRegistration):
   ```console
   cd test/go-tests && KEPTN_ENDPOINT="http://127.0.0.1:8080/api" go test ./...
   ```

>    **Note**: If you want to run a single test, (e.g. BackupTestore_Test), please add `_test` suffix to the test file name, so it becomes executable. Otherwise, you will be able to run only the `testsuite_*_test.go` files. For running a single test use:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   **Note**: If you want to run a single test, (e.g. BackupTestore_Test), please add `_test` suffix to the test file name, so it becomes executable. Otherwise, you can run only `testsuite_*_test.go` files. For running a single test use:
```
